**Policy and Procedure 2.1 - Earth Science Information Partners (ESIP) Community Code of Conduct**
==================================================================================================

A code of conduct is a set of rules outlining the responsibilities of,
or proper practices for, an individual, party or organization. ESIP
shall have a code of conduct in which members must abide by or be
removed as an ESIP member.

ESIP is dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for
everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age,
sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or
religion (or lack thereof). ESIP does not tolerate harassment of
community members in any form. Discriminatory, intimidating or offensive
language and imagery is not appropriate for any ESIP venue, including
ESIP Meetings, telecons, workshops, social events, virtual workspace,
Twitter and other online media.

ESIP is an apolitical organization. Although being affiliated with ESIP
is generally encouraged, individual members and member organizations
should not use their affiliation with ESIP when expressing personal
opinions, or as a representative ESIP, without written agreement or
request from the ESIP President and approved by the Program Committee.

Members, in the core spirit of the ESIP Federation, are expected to
respect the diverse ideas and opinions of fellow members, and maintain a
working environment that is open and non-offensive to any of its
members.

ESIP community members violating these rules may be sanctioned or
expelled from the ESIP meetings or banned from the ESIP websites without
a refund at the discretion of the ESIP leader(s) involved. The
Governance Chair, Vice-President and President will examine reported
cases of misconduct in order to determine appropriate sanctions. In
extreme cases, the member may be removed from ESIP, as described in
Policy and Procedure 1.2, section 4.6.

The ESIP Code of Conduct is ever-evolving and all feedback is welcome.
Please email the ESIP Partnership Chair or Annie Burgess
(annieburgess@esipfed.org), or the ESIP Community Director with
feedback.

This code of conduct was based on:
[[http://confcodeofconduct.com/]{.underline}](http://confcodeofconduct.com/)

This Policy was approved by the Board of Directors of ESIP on October
17, 2017.
