**Policy and Procedure 2.4 -- Fundraising and Proposal Development**
====================================================================

**Guiding Principles:**

ESIP raises funds to sustain its operations. It does so by seeking
funding for activities that are specific to ESIP as a member
organization (e.g., running meetings, supporting clusters). ESIP is
also hoping to attract funding for an endowment that would help assure
its operations in times when other funds are not available. And ESIP
also maintains---and will fundraise for---designated funds for certain
activities (e.g., the Raskin Award).

ESIP is a member organization and its members are also organizations.
As such it is obliged to look to the interests of it members. All
members of ESIP should be provided with equal access to information on
grants, contracts or any other funding opportunities that ESIP
discovers and/or pursues.

**A: General Rules:**

**A-1**: Although many of its members are research organizations. ESIP
is not primarily a research organization. The ESIP Lab is an
opportunity to serve its members by providing shared services for
their research. ESIP does not have a goal to become an organization
that competes with its members for funding to do Earth science
research. ESIP may seek funding to perform sociological research
directed at a better understanding of how ESIP operates as an
organization.

**A-2:** Occasionally, research agencies may ask ESIP to house certain
activities where ESIP's capabilities are appropriate (e.g., evaluating
technology). Again, these projects are meant to leverage ESIP's
ability as a community organization, and not to perform basic Earth
science research. In these cases, ESIP will provide its members with
information on how they can participate in these funded activities.

**A-3:** ESIP intends to not compete with its members individually or
collectively for funding opportunities. ESIP will announce to its
members when it is pursuing an open call (RFP) for a funding
opportunity. Should an ESIP member object (via an email to the ESIP
President) to ESIP pursuing funding, this matter will be decided by a
vote of the Program Committee, which will advise staff to pursue or
refrain from pursuing the opportunity. ESIP can request funding from
private foundations for ESIP community support without constraint.

**A-4:** ESIP is not a funding organization. Some funds from ESIP
sponsors are made available for ESIP members to do work in ESIP
committees, working groups, clusters, and the Lab. On behalf of its
members, and guidance from its member-volunteer leadership, ESIP will
fundraise to support these efforts and other activities, such as
student fellows and FUNding Friday, that help make ESIP a successful
community organization.

**B : ESIP Letters of Support:**
================================

**D-1:** Any ESIP member can request a standard letter of support
for their proposals from ESIP even when competing with another ESIP
member for the same grant or contract.

**D-2:** To receive a letter of support from ESIP, the ESIP member
shall articulate how the proposed work would benefit ESIP as a whole.

**D-3:** The application for a letter of support (and the accompanying
proposal) should be addressed to the ESIP President and sent to
staff@esipfed.org.

**D-4:** The ESIP member shall notify the ESIP about the results of
the proposal selection process.

This Policy was approved by the Board of Directors of ESIP on October
17, 2017.
