Policy and Procedure 1.7 - ESIP Endorsements

As a community serving organization, ESIP welcomes open discussion of
all products, services and official statements for the advancement of
Earth Sciences. From time to time, community consensus is built within
ESIP on highly relevant and timely products, services or issues. These
are opportunities for ESIP to make an endorsement, which can help to
bring concordance and direction for the benefit of the larger community.

For purposes of this policy and procedure, endorsements would include
statements of public agreement or support but do not bind members to
subsequent actions. Certain steps and guidelines should be followed to
ensure that an ESIP endorsement is warranted:

In general, ESIP will never endorse a commercial product or a particular
technology standard. ESIP's use of a commercial product or standard does
not serve as an endorsement. The endorsement of products or services
will generally arise out of one of the existing collaboration areas
and/or closely align with the mission and strategic goals.

1.7.1 Proposing Endorsements

Any Representative of the Assembly may propose an ESIP endorsement.
Proposals shall be submitted in writing (e.g., email) to the Chair of
the ESIP Program Committee prior to any action on the proposed
endorsement. The Proposal shall include a history of the work or issue
and a statement describing why it is of benefit for ESIP to endorse the
product, service or statement.

1.7.2 Endorsement Approval

The Program Committee shall review the endorsement proposal and render
their opinion as to its history, relevance, timeliness and risk versus
benefit to the Organization. If the Program Committee agrees that the
endorsement should go forward, the proposal shall be subject to a 30 day
comment period among members of the Assembly. Following this review, a
vote shall be held by a simple majority of the Assembly to determine
final approval. The President, on behalf of the Assembly, will then
issue the endorsement and place a note to this effect on the ESIP
Endorsements website.

1.7.3 Removing an Endorsement

ESIP volunteer leadership, as defined in [Policy and Procedure 1.3,
section 2 part
1](https://github.com/ESIPFed/Governance/blob/master/ESIP%20Policies%20and%20Procedures/1.0%20Corporate/ESIP%20P%26P%201.3%20Corporate%20Organization.md),
can request that an endorsement be removed by a majority vote of the
Assembly if it is found to be inappropriate or out of date.

This policy was approved by the ESIP Board on October 23, 2018.

See also [the ESIP Endorsement Decision
tree](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1pQBOH-WTo8SAfpvsXOIWP3oSlbPQCX8Xw9Up39ykJZg/edit)
and a [list of prior endorsements (Assembly Adopted
tab)](https://www.esipfed.org/esip-outputs-list).
