**Policy and Procedure 4.2 - Handling of Employee and Volunteer Personal
Records**

1)  **Purpose**

The purpose of this policy is to ensure that each ESIP employee and
volunteer exercises reasonable efforts to safeguard the confidentiality,
security and privacy of employment records and the personal information
of its former and current employees and volunteers.

2)  **Definitions of Information and Data Relating to this Policy**

Sensitive personal information means the following, when combined with
any additional information sufficient to identify an individual
(including name, address or telephone number):

-   Social security number

-   Credit or debit card numbers

-   Financial information and bank account numbers

-   Driver\'s license or state identification card numbers

-   Passport information (i.e., any information included in a passport).

-   Federal or state identification card

-   Personal email addresses

-   Personal telephone numbers

-   Personal street address

-   Date of birth

-   Health information protected under HIPAA

-   Access codes or passwords that would permit access to an
    individual\'s personal information

Employment records means the personnel records of employees maintained
for payroll, tax reporting, health coverage, and other employment
activities (e.g., airline mileage club membership).

3)  **Handling of Employee and Volunteer Records Policy**

This policy pertains to an employee or volunteer\'s personal
information, mostly including sensitive personal information as defined
above. Such information is considered to be confidential and cannot be
released, except as permitted by this policy, without authorization.

ESIP-assigned information, which may include office telephone numbers,
e-mail addresses, work addresses, is not considered to be personal
information. ESIP retains the right to communicate and distribute such
information as it deems necessary to conduct its operations.

Access to employment records or personal information regarding an
employee is limited to the current employee and, for official business
purposes with exceptions authorized by the ESIP Executive Director.
Employment records and personal information may be disclosed to third
parties only:

\(1) as necessary to enable ESIP agents to implement ESIP's routine
employment, employment verification and payroll; provided that: (i) the
ESIP Executive Director has approved the disclosure, and (ii) the ESIP
Executive Director has confirmed that the recipient of such information
is legally obligated to protect the privacy and security of such
information.

\(2) with the individual\'s consent, or

\(3) pursuant to a legal authorization, such as a subpoena, court order
or official written request from a state or federal investigatory
agency.

4)  **Employee and Volunteer Personal Records Procedure**

Release of personal information. Employment records and the personal
information of employees and volunteer, including an individual\'s
sensitive personal information, may not be accessed or released, except
as permitted by the handling of employee and volunteer records policy.

Disposal of employee and volunteer personal records shall comply with
[ESIP Policy and Procedure 1-6: Record Maintenance](https://github.com/ESIPFed/Governance/blob/master/ESIP%20Policies%20and%20Procedures/1.0%20Corporate/ESIP%20P%26P%201.6%20Record%20Maintenance%20Policy.md).

Employment verification and income verification for current or former
employees will be provided by ESIP and/or its agents to banks or other
to external parties only upon the individual\'s request or
authorization. Similarly, employment references will be provided by ESIP
to external parties only upon the individual\'s request or authorization
and should represent the experience of the person providing the
reference rather than that of ESIP as a whole.

ESIP's agents may verify employment and income, upon employee request.Â 
Verification will include the following information: only a) appointment
status, b) job title, and c) dates of employment.

This Policy was approved by the Board of Directors of ESIP on October
17, 2017.
