**Policy and Procedure 4.1 - Earth Science Information Partners**

**Employee Handbook**

Updated May 2017

**TABLE OF CONTENTS:**

**ITEM** **PAGE**

**WELCOME** 1

**EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY** 1

**HANDBOOK USE AND PURPOSE** 3

**WORK ELIGIBILITY** 3

**INTRODUCTORY PERIOD** 3

**EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATIONS** 4

**POSITION DESCRIPTIONS** 4

**JOB POSTINGS** 5

**TRANSFERS AND PROMOTIONS** 5

**PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS** 5

**EMPLOYMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS** 5

**MEDICAL/DENTAL BENEFITS** 5

**VACATIONS** 5

**HOLIDAYS** 7

**SICK TIME** 7

**MATERNITY/PATERNITY LEAVE** 8

**DISABILITY LEAVE** 8

**LONG-TERM ILLNESS OR PERMANENT INJURY** 9

**JURY AND WITNESS DUTY** 10

**MILITARY LEAVE** 10

**PERSONAL LEAVE** 10

**PAY PERIODS** 11

**TIMEKEEPING REQUIREMENTS** 11

**WAGE GARNISHMENTS** 11

**PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS** 11

**SALARY PHILOSOPHY** 11

**SALARY REVIEWS** 12

**SALARY BONUS** 12

**RETIREMENT PLAN BENEFIT** 12

**PERSONAL AUTOMOBILE USE** 12

**EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT** 12

**OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT POLICY** 12

**CONFIDENTIALITY OF VOICE MAIL AND ELECTRONIC MAIL** 13

**EMPLOYEE INFORMATION** 13

**FOUNDATION CONFIDENTIALITY** 14

**SPEAKING TO THE MEDIA** 14

**INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS** 14

**HARASSMENT** 14

**WORKPLACE CONDUCT** 15

**OPEN-DOOR POLICY** 15

**DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES** 15

**COMPLAINT PROCEDURES** 16

**CONFLICT OF INTEREST** 16

**AT-WILL STATUS** 17

**VOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT** 17

**INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION** 17

**JOB ELIMINATION AND LAYOFFS** 18

**EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT** 18

**LEAVE REQUEST FORM** 20

**WELCOME**

Welcome to ESIP ! We believe that outstanding people are the key to our
success. Through the efforts of our staff members, ESIP has established
itself as a leading organization in our community. To ensure our
continued success, we feel it is important that all staff members
understand our policies and procedures. This handbook is intended to
help familiarize you with them[.]{.smallcaps} We encourage you to use
this handbook as a valuable resource for understanding our organization.

If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to ask either your
manager or any member of our management team.

My best wishes to you, and thank you for taking this first step in
getting to know ESIP .

Erin Robinson, Executive Director

**EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY**

ESIP is an equal opportunity employer and complies will all applicable
federal, state and local fair employment practice laws. ESIP strictly
prohibits and does not tolerate discrimination against employees,
applicants or any other covered persons because of disability, race,
creed, color, sex, sexual orientation (including a person's orientation
toward heterosexuality, homosexuality, bi-sexuality or transgender
status, or ESIP 's perception thereof), religion, age, national origin,
ancestry, citizenship, past, current or prospective service in the
uniformed services, genetic information, or any other characteristic
protected under applicable federal, state or local law. All employees,
other workers and other representatives of ESIP are prohibited from
engaging in unlawful discrimination. This policy applies to all terms
and conditions of employment, including but not limited, hiring,
training, promotion, discipline, compensation, benefits and termination
of employment.

ESIP complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as
amended by the ADA Amendments Act and the Colorado Anti-Discrimination
Act. Consistent with those requirements, ESIP will reasonably
accommodate qualified individuals with a disability if such an
accommodation will allow the individual to perform the essential
functions of the job, unless doing so would create an undue hardship. If
you believe you need an accommodation, refer any such requests to our
Executive Director or the Board Chair. Please expressly identify your
disability accommodations request by expressing it a request under ESIP
's Disability Accommodations Policy. ESIP will also, where appropriate,
provide reasonable accommodations for an employee's religious beliefs or
practices.

If you are subjected to any conduct that you believe violates this
policy, you must promptly speak to, write or otherwise contact your
direct supervisor, the Executive Director, or the Board Chair as soon as
possible following the offending conduct. If you have not received a
satisfactory response within five (5) business days after reporting any
incident that you perceive to be discriminatory conduct, please
immediately contact the Executive Director or the Board Chair . These
individuals will ensure that a prompt investigation is conducted. The
complaint should be as detailed as possible, including the names of all
individuals involved and any witnesses. ESIP will directly and
thoroughly investigate the facts and circumstances of all claims of
perceived discrimination and will take prompt corrective action, if
appropriate.

Additionally, any manager or supervisor who observes discriminatory
conduct must report the conduct to the Executive Director or the Board
Chaire so that an investigation can be made and corrective action taken,
if appropriate.

No one will be subject to, and ESIP prohibits, any form of discipline,
reprisal, intimation or retaliation for good faith reports or complaints
of incidents of discrimination of any kind, pursuing any discrimination
claim or cooperating in related investigations.

ESIP is committed to enforcing this policy against all forms of
discrimination. However, the effectiveness of our efforts depends
largely on employees telling us about inappropriate workplace conduct.
If employees feel that they or someone else may have been subjected to
conduct that violates this policy, they should report it immediately. If
employees do not report discriminatory conduct, ESIP may not become
aware of a possible violation of this policy and may not be able to take
appropriate corrective action.

Any employee, regardless of position or title, who ESIP determines has
subjected an individual to discrimination or retaliation in violation of
this policy will be subject to discipline, up to and including
termination of employment.

The Executive Director and Board Chair are responsible for the
administration of this policy. If you have any question regarding this
policy or questions about discrimination, accommodations or retaliation
that are not addressed in this policy, please contact the Executive
Director or the Board Chair.

**HANDBOOK USE AND PURPOSE**

The purpose of this Staff Member Handbook is to outline certain
information about your employment with ESIP [.]{.smallcaps} The policies
described here are in effect and supersede all other versions of these
policies previously given to you either orally or in writing.

The provisions of these policies may, at the discretion of our Board of
Directors, be modified, revoked or changed from time to time. It also
should be noted that our policies do not cover every situation that can
and will arise in the workplace. Above all, we ask that you exercise
common courtesy and common sense while on the job.

If you have questions regarding your employment or anything contained in
these policies, please speak with your manager or our executive
director.

**WORK ELIGIBILITY **

Typically, on the first day at work all new staff members will be asked
to fill out appropriate forms for payroll purposes and for personnel
records. In accordance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of
1986 (IRCA), all new staff members at ESIP are also required as a
condition of employment to provide documentation that establishes their
identity and legal right to work in the United States.

**INTRODUCTORY PERIOD**

Your first 90 calendar days of employment are an introductory period.
Certain benefits will not be available to you until the completion of
this period.

During your introductory period, your manager will observe and talk with
you about your job performance. This period also provides you with the
opportunity to judge how well your new position suits you.

Your employment is a mutual relationship between you and ESIP , which
either party may end during or after your introductory period.
Completion of your introductory period is not a guarantee of continued
employment.

**EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATIONS**

We place staff members into classifications based on job description,
consistent with the Fair Labor Standards Act and applicable state law.

**Exempt Employee**

An executive, administrative or professional employee who is exempt from
the provisions of the FLSA, usually paid an annual salary.

**Nonexempt Employee**

An employee (generally paid by the hour) who is eligible for overtime
pay according to the provisions of the FLSA.

**Regular Full-Time Employee**

A salaried or hourly employee who is normally scheduled to work 30 hours
or more per workweek and whose employment has no specified end date.

**Regular Part-Time Employee**

A salaried or hourly employee who is normally scheduled to work between
15 and 29 hours per workweek and whose employment has no specified end
date.

**Temporary Employee**

An employee who is hired on a full- or part-time basis for a specified
period of time, usually not to exceed six months.

**On-Call Employee**

A nonexempt employee who is not required to work a specified number of
hours in any given workweek, but who is scheduled to work on an
as-needed basis.

**Inactive Employee**

An employee who is on a leave of absence and is not receiving pay from
[ESIP .]{.smallcaps}

**POSITION DESCRIPTIONS**

You will receive a position description outlining the primary functions
and responsibilities of your job. Your position description is not
designed to spell out all the duties and tasks associated with your
employment; all our staff members are expected to fulfill both essential
and secondary job duties and requirements. Position descriptions are not
set in stone and will change, in whole or in part, over time. You are
expected to discuss any significant changes in your functions with and
responsibilities your manager, who has the authority to formalize
changes in position descriptions at his or her discretion.

**JOB POSTINGS**

We post all full-time and part-time job openings internally via staff
memo or daily announcements. The job may be posted and/or advertised
externally at the same time, as appropriate. Jobs are internally posted
for a minimum of five business days, and no job will be filled until the
minimum posting period has ended.

**TRANSFERS AND PROMOTIONS**

To be eligible to apply for a transfer or promotion, an employee must
have been in his/her current position for at least six months and must
be meeting the requirements of the current position. Employees on a
written warning dealing with job performance or unacceptable behavior
are ineligible for transfers or promotions. Any exceptions to these
policies must be approved by the executive director.

**PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS**

In addition to your 90-day performance review at the completion of your
introductory period, you also will participate with your manager in an
annual performance review process. As part of this annual process, you
and your manager will assess your accomplishments during the previous
year, and set new performance goals for the coming year.

**EMPLOYMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS**

In order to preserve the objectivity and integrity of the foundation's
Board of Directors, any member who wishes to apply for employment with
the foundation must first resign from the board.

**MEDICAL/DENTAL BENEFITS**

ESIP will provide each full-time employee with a "cafeteria plan"
benefit of \$350 per month which can be allocated by the employee to pay
medical/dental, life insurance and long-term care insurance premiums.

**VACATIONS**

We offer paid vacation time to eligible staff members for their rest and
recreation away from work. ESIP recognizes the value of time away from
work responsibilities and encourages staff members to use all accrued
vacation benefits on a timely basis. Since vacation time is primarily
intended to increase an individual's productivity by providing an
opportunity to get away from normal stresses of the work environment, it
is strongly encouraged that all ESIP staff take at least one vacation a
year of five or more consecutive work days.

After the first year of employment, the employee shall earn vacation
days for the following year on the anniversary of the date of hire. No
more than five days of unused paid vacation may be carried from one year
to employment to the next year of employment. Vacation may not be taken
in units of less than one day.

All computations in this manual refer to the term "year of employment"
shall commence on the date full-time employment with ESIP began.

**Eligibility**

All regular staff members who work an average of 30 hours per week or
more begin to accrue vacation time on the first day of employment;
however, staff members may not take time off for vacation until they
complete six months of continuous service.

**Allocation of Days**

Regular full-time staff members will be awarded paid vacation at based
on the following schedule. During the first 12 months of employment, the
vacation time will be accrued based on the months worked. Following 12
months of employment, the following days are awarded per year, based on
the length of employment.

[Length of Service]{.underline} [Days per Month]{.underline} [Days per
Year]{.underline}

0 - 12 months 1 10

13 - 60 months 15

61 or more months 20

**Scheduling**

Accrued vacation may be taken after completion of the first six months
of employment. Vacation requests must be made at least 30 days in
advance and require the approval of the executive director. Conflicting
requests will be decided by length of service. All vacation requests
should be cleared with the appropriate supervisor by email. Occasionally
vacation plans change after the leave has been approved. Should this
occur, the employee's supervisor must approve the change and make a
timely notification to the Human Resources Manager so that accurate
records can be maintained.

Every effort will be made to grant vacation requests for the time
desired. However, vacations should not unduly interfere with the
department's operations. If any conflict arises in requests for vacation
time or if the requested vacation time is not conducive to ESIP's
schedule and operations, ESIP reserves the right to deny any vacation
leave request.

**HOLIDAYS**

All regular staff members receive paid time off for the following
holidays:

New Year's Day

Presidents' Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veterans' Day

Thanksgiving Day

The Friday After Thanksgiving

Christmas Eve

Christmas Day

New Year's Eve

**SICK TIME**

We provide paid sick time to regular full- time staff members to provide
you with protection against loss of income if you are ill or injured, or
if you need time off from work for necessary or routine health care.

Sick leave may be taken when:

1.  An employee is incapacitated by sickness, injury or confinement.

2.  An employee is receiving medical, dental or optical examination or
    > treatment.

3.  An employee would jeopardize the health of others by his or her
    > presence in the office.

4.  An employee is authorized maternity or paternity leave.

5.  An employee must care for an infirm spouse or child.

Up to ten days of sick leave are authorized during each year of
employment. Sick leave may not be carried over to the next year of
employment. ESIP staff that must be absent from work because of illness
or injury will contact their supervisor or other ESIP staff as soon as
possible. Notification of ESIP Human Resources Manager should be
accomplished in a timely manner using the ESIP Leave Request Form.

**Payment**

We do not offer pay in lieu of use of accrued sick time, and staff
members

do not receive payment for accrued sick time when they leave our employ.

**MATERNITY/PATERNITY LEAVE**

Female employees are authorized to utilize up to four weeks of maternity
leave if they are unable to work due to medical reasons. Maternity
leave, like other medical disabilities, will first consist of unused
sick leave and then any unused vacation leave. After the unused sick
leave and vacation leave, which are paid leave, have been used, ESIP
will pay for two weeks of maternity leave. Any leave taken in excess of
unused sick leave/vacation leave, and the two weeks of paid maternity
leave is considered leave without pay.

ESIP is also concerned for mothers and fathers of newborn children and
the need to bond with the newborn child during the first weeks at home.
Both female and male employees will be allowed up to four weeks of
paternity leave. Paternity leave will first consist of unused sick leave
and then unused vacation leave. ESIP will pay for no more than two weeks
of combined maternity/paternity leave. Any leave taken in excess of
unused sick leave/vacation leave, and the two weeks of
maternity/paternity leave is considered to be leave without pay.

**DISABILITY LEAVE**

**Eligibility**

Full and part-time staff members of ESIP are eligible for unpaid medical
leave after they complete the introductory period (exceptions for
pregnancy disability leave may apply). Medical leaves are granted when a
staff member is temporarily unable to perform his or her job due to
illness, injury, pregnancy and/or childbirth. Medical leaves are granted
for the duration of the disability, up to a maximum of six months.

**Requesting a Leave**

If you become disabled, you should promptly notify your manager. Written
certification from your physician or other licensed health practitioner
stating the nature of your disability, the date your disability began
and the expected date of your return to work should be provided to your
manager. We may request that you provide us with additional medical
verification of your continuing disability from time to time during the
course of your leave as well.

**Pay During Leave**

Staff members must use any accrued sick leave at the beginning of a
medical leave. After accrued sick leave is used up, a staff member may
use accrued vacation time. Staff members are considered inactive when
they are no longer being paid and are on a medical leave.

**Return to Work**

Staff members returning from leaves resulting from pregnancy, childbirth
or other related medical conditions will be guaranteed re-employment in
the same position except when, due to organizational necessity, a
position has ceased to exist during the leave. In that event, we will
seek to provide the returning staff member with a substantially similar
position.

Staff members returning from other types of medical leave will be
returned to the same or a similar position whenever possible; however,
ESIP cannot guarantee re-employment.

You may be asked to provide a physician's certification of your fitness
to return to work. Your manager should be told of any change in the date
of your return to work in advance.

**End of Employment**

A staff member away from work on a medical leave will be considered to
have voluntarily resigned from ESIP if:

• The staff member fails to notify the agency of her availability for
work after the disability ceases

• The staff member fails to return to work after the disability has
ceased and a position is available

A staff member who resigns because she has exceeded the maximum leave
time allowed will be given special rehire consideration when she is able
to return to work.

**LONG-TERM ILLNESS OR PERMANENT INJURY**

An employee whose leave is necessitated by a disabling, non-
work-related physical or mental impairment, which substantially limits
one of the employee's major life activities and is expected to be
ongoing for a substantial period of time or is of permanent duration,
may be accommodated with longer and more frequent leaves as long as such
leaves will not result in an undue hardship on the foundation.

Such employees will be returned to their same job, unless, for
organizational reasons, the agency was unable to hold the job open or to
fill it temporarily because to do so would have resulted in an undue
hardship on the agency. Under these circumstances, the agency will offer
the employee a substantially similar job if one exists that the employee
is qualified to perform.

**JURY AND WITNESS DUTY **

Both exempt and nonexempt staff members are eligible for up to one
week's paid leave when called upon to serve as a juror or witness at a
trial. You will be asked to provide documentation showing your required
days of attendance. If you are released by the court after serving a
partial day, you are expected to report to work and complete your normal
workday unless you make other arrangements with your manager.

Exempt staff members who are required to serve longer than a week, and
who do some work for ESIP during each of the remaining weeks served,
will continue to receive full pay while on jury duty.

**MILITARY LEAVE **

We seek to comply with all state and federal laws regarding leaves of
absence for military duty. Please speak with your office manager or the
executive director in the event that you need to schedule such a leave.

**PERSONAL LEAVE**

Person leave is considered time when an employee will be permitted to be
absent from the office, with pay, because of the following
circumstances:

1.  Death in the immediate family, or

2.  Serious illness in the immediate family

Immediate family is considered to be spouse, children, parents, brothers
or sisters, and grandparents.

Up to two days of personal leave will be granted to each employee per
year of employment. If an employee exhausts his or her personal leave
allotment and is in need of additional time away from the office for the
reasons outlined in this section, ESIP will examine whether annual
vacation, additional personal leave or a leave-without-pay status should
be used to supplement existing personal leave time.

Personal leave time should not be considered an automatic addition to
annual vacation. It is to be used only on an "as needed" basis and my
not be carried forward to the next year of employment.

**PAY PERIODS**

We pay staff members on the last day of the month. If the payday falls
on a holiday, staff members will be paid on the last working day before
the holiday.

**TIMEKEEPING REQUIREMENTS**

All staff members must complete a time sheet for each pay period.
Nonexempt staff members should record actual hours worked plus all use
of paid time off. Exempt staff members need only track use of paid days
off.

**WAGE GARNISHMENTS **

From time to time we may be required to withhold monies from an
employee's pay. If this foundation receives a court-authorized
garnishment or levy, the impacted staff member will be notified
immediately.

**PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS **

Your payroll and earnings deductions are detailed with your check.
Mandated and voluntary deductions usually include:

[Mandated by federal and state law]{.underline} [Voluntary]{.underline}

Federal income tax Retirement account

State income tax

Social Security tax/Medicare tax

Garnishments/Wage attachments

Any questions about your paycheck should be directed to the director of
finance.

**SALARY PHILOSOPHY**

At ESIP we strive for fairness and equity in all our policies and
practices, including those that affect compensation. We offer a
compensation package (your annual salary plus benefits) that reflects
competitiveness in the marketplace and concern for our staff members'
ability to balance their work and personal lives.

**SALARY REVIEWS**

Except in extraordinary circumstances, a salary increase will be
provided annually to all employees based on a combination of merit
factors and cost-of-living adjustments.

**SALARY BONUS**

ESIP does not provide a general salary bonus system, but instead will
consider periodic recommendations for salary increases made by the
Executive Director aimed at recognizing exceptional performance and/or
salary inequities.

**RETIREMENT PLAN BENEFIT**

ESIP will provide matching contribution of up to 5% of salary for
employee contributions to a qualified retirement account arrangement.

**PERSONAL AUTOMOBILE USE**

Employees who use their own automobiles for travel on authorized agency
business will be reimbursed for mileage at the rate established by the
IRS. Employees must have prior supervisory approval for the use of
personal vehicles and must carry, at their own expense, the minimum
insurance coverage for property damage and public liability.

**EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT**

Staff members are reimbursed for approved travel and entertainment
expenses. Staff members are asked to complete a record of all expenses
for which they seek reimbursement and to submit receipts along with the
expense record for reimbursement. Reimbursement is made via check within
two weeks of receipt of the reimbursement request.

**OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT POLICY**

ESIP recognizes that some employees may seek additional outside
employment, including second jobs, consulting engagements,
self-employment and volunteer activities. To protect ESIP 's business
interests while employees are engaged in outside employment, ESIP has
adopted the following rules and guidelines relating to outside
employment by employees:

-   Before beginning outside employment, employees must obtain advanced
    written approval for the outside employment from the Executive
    Director.

-   Outside employment must not interfere with the employee's work
    performance or work schedule.

-   Employees may not use ESIP 's property, facilities, equipment,
    supplies, IT systems (such as computers, networks, e-mail,
    telephones or voice mail), time, trademark, brand, or reputation in
    connection with any outside employment.

-   Employees engaging in outside employment must comply with ESIP 's
    policies and procedures identified in this handbook.

If you are considering outside employment, but are not sure if it
complies with the rules and guidelines set out in this policy, you
should speak with the Executive Director, who will help you determine
whether the outside employment complies with this policy. Any employee,
regardless of position or title, who is determined to have violated this
policy will be subject to discipline, up to and including termination of
employment.

**CONFIDENTIALITY OF VOICE MAIL AND ELECTRONIC MAIL**

Employees use voice mail and electronic mail to communicate with others
in the agency and to receive messages when they are unavailable.
Employees should be aware that voice mail and electronic mail messages
are not private and are subject to review by the agency in the case of
an investigation of unlawful activity or violations of agency policy.

**EMPLOYEE INFORMATION**

It is important that personnel files contain up-to-date information
regarding each employee. Employees should inform their supervisor
immediately whenever there are changes in their personal data, such as
address, telephone number, marital status, domestic partnership, number
of dependents and person to notify in case of emergency.

Employees have the right to inspect their personnel file during regular
office hours, given reasonable notice to the foundation. An appointment
to inspect the file may be made with the director of operations, who
will accompany the employee while he/she inspects his/her file.
Employees may obtain copies of any document in their personnel file to
the extent required by law. Personnel records are the property of ESIP
and are not allowed to leave the office of the director of operations
without authorization.

No reference information other than a verification of dates of
employment, wage and title(s) will be given out to a third party without
prior written authorization by the employee.

**FOUNDATION CONFIDENTIALITY**

Confidential information obtained during or through employment with ESIP
may not be used by any staff member for the purpose of furthering
current or future outside employment or activities, or for obtaining
personal gain or profit.

At no time should a staff member disclose nonpublic or sensitive
information to individuals other than on a need-to-know basis.

**SPEAKING TO THE MEDIA**

ESIP has designated the Executive Director as the person responsible for
speaking with the press and making written and oral statements for
publication. Any request for information or interviews by the media
should be referred to the executive director.

**INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS**

We use mail and office E-mail to communicate important information to
staff members on a regular basis. Each of our staff members is
responsible for reading posted or distributed information on a timely
basis.

**HARASSMENT **

It is illegal to harass others on the basis of their sex, sexual
orientation, age, race, color, national origin, religion, marital or
veteran status, citizenship, disability or other personal
characteristics. Harassment includes making derogatory remarks about
such characteristics, making jokes about ethnic or other groups and
other verbal, physical and visual behavior.

Sexual harassment is also prohibited. Propositions, repeated requests
for dates, dirty jokes, sexually provocative pictures or cartoons and
other verbal, physical and visual harassment of a sexual nature are
prohibited. The harassment of any staff member will lead to immediate
disciplinary action up to and including termination.

Any staff member who feels harassed has the right to file a charge with
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and with a state agency.
Before doing so, we ask that you first speak with your manager. If your
manager is not appropriate, then speak with our executive director or
the Board Chair, so that appropriate internal action may be taken. It is
the responsibility of all managers to listen to such complaints and to
refer them to the appropriate authority. We will not retaliate against
any staff member who makes a claim of harassment.

**WORKPLACE CONDUCT**

We have developed certain guidelines to reflect what we believe are good
business practices. We strive to develop and maintain a pleasant,
efficient and fair work environment that fosters cooperation and
understanding.

All staff members are expected to be:

• On time for all appointments, meetings, and teleconferences

• Careful and conscientious in the performance of their work

• Respectful and considerate of others

• Courteous and helpful, both when dealing with other staff members and
with volunteers, supporters and the general public

**OPEN-DOOR POLICY**

All staff members are encouraged to provide input and suggestions
concerning the overall operations and programs of ESIP , following
appropriate communication channels. Staff members should initially bring
their comments to their own manager. When that may be inappropriate,
staff members may speak directly with the executive director.

We operate in an open-door manner. All input from staff will be
considered and can be presented without fear of personal recrimination.

**DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES**

**Disciplinary Action**

The primary objective of any disciplinary action is to improve job
performance. Actions by a staff member that are inappropriate for the
work environment, are a hindrance to effective job performance or
violate agency policy constitute improper conduct and may be cause for
disciplinary action.

ESIP maintains a progressive and participatory disciplinary system,
which may include all or some of the following steps:

1\. Documented oral warning

2\. Written warning

3\. Final written warning

4\. Suspension

5\. Dismissal

Based on circumstances, a manager may choose to enter into disciplinary
action at any step in the process, including immediate dismissal. All
disciplinary action beyond oral warning requires the approval of the
executive director.

**COMPLAINT PROCEDURES**

**Employee Appeal Process**

As a matter of general policy, managers at all levels will provide an
open door for discussion and a receptive ear, and will review all staff
member suggestions or complaints concerning our work practices and
procedures.

If a staff member wishes to make a formal complaint, it should be done
within a reasonable time after the incident or issue has occurred. We
consider an open discussion between employee and manager as the first
step of the complaint procedure. The manager must respond to the
complaint in a timely manner. If the complaint is not resolved by the
manager within a reasonable time frame, or if the staff member disagrees
with the manager's solution, the staff member may appeal directly to the
executive director.

At this point the complaint must be written down, with the nature of the
grievance clearly outlined. The executive director will investigate the
complaint and notify the staff member, in writing, of her/his decision
within a reasonable amount of time.

As a last resort, a staff member may take her/his complaint to the Board
of Directors. The Board\'s decision constitutes the agency's final word
on the matter.

**CONFLICT OF INTEREST**

We are proud of our reputation for conducting our activities with
fairness and integrity. We require all our staff members to uphold this
reputation in every work-related activity. If you are ever in doubt
about whether an activity meets our high ethical standards or
compromises our reputation, please discuss your concerns with your
manager or our executive director.

We require employees to abide by ESIP's Conflict of Interest Policy and
to annually disclose any conflicts.

**AT-WILL STATUS**

We hope to retain good employees. However, employment at ESIP is for no
specified time, regardless of length of service. Just as you are free to
leave at any time, for any reason, we reserve the same right to end our
employment relationship with you at any time, with or without notice,
for any reason not prohibited by law.

No policy contained in this handbook should be interpreted as in any way
changing your at-will status.

**VOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT**

Any staff member may voluntarily resign her/his position at any time and
for any reason. We will also consider that you have resigned if you:

• Fail to return from an approved leave of absence on the specified
return date

• Fail to report to work without notice for three consecutive days

All staff members are asked to give a minimum of two weeks' written
notice of resignation. If a staff member is required to leave our employ
before the duration of her/his notice (if, for example, a replacement is
hired) the staff member will be paid for the two-week notice period.

Staff members are required to turn over all keys and other foundation
property to the office manager before leaving on their last day of work.

**INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION**

This agency reserves the right to terminate any employee at any time,
with or without cause or notice. Generally, when an employee is
believed, in the opinion of his/her supervisor, to have a job
performance problem or to be engaging in behavior that is unacceptable
or counterproductive, the employee will be given an opportunity to
improve his/her performance or behavior to an acceptable level by means
of a formal disciplinary action process. However, the following list,
while not complete, gives examples of behavior that can result in
immediate termination of employment:

• Breaching confidentiality

• Violating the drug- and alcohol-free workplace policy

• Theft---including, but not limited to, the removal of foundation
property or the property of another employee from agency premises
without prior authorization

• Walking off the job without supervisory approval

• Fighting, roughhousing, abusive language or conduct that is hostile or
disrespectful toward a co-worker, supervisor, board member, volunteer,
or any person(s) associated with or served by this foundation

•Knowingly creating an unsafe work situation for self or co-worker

• Falsifying or altering records or time sheets

• Refusing to perform a work-related duty when directly instructed to do
so by a supervisor or member of management

• Possessing weapons or firearms on this foundation\'s property

• Unauthorized use or dissemination of proprietary information

• Violating this foundation's equal opportunity or harassment policies

• Unauthorized use of foundation property

All involuntary terminations require review by the executive director.

**JOB ELIMINATION AND LAYOFFS**

From time to time, we may need to lay-off an employee as a result of
reorganization, job elimination, funding changes or lack of work. Should
such a termination be necessary, all affected staff members will be
given as much advance notice as is possible and practical.

If you lose your job due to a layoff or reorganization, you will receive
all accrued, unused vacation pay, plus one week of severance pay for
each year of employment up to a maximum of eight weeks' pay.

**EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

Please read the following information and return this acknowledgment
form to your direct supervisor for inclusion in your personnel file.

This handbook is provided to you for information and immediate
reference. Because we are a dynamic and changing organization, policies
included in this handbook are subject to unilateral change, revision,
deletion or addition by this organization from time to time with or
without prior notice.

**You are an employee at-will**. No policy in this handbook should be
interpreted as in any way changing, altering or nullifying our policy of
voluntary, at-will employment. Your employment with this organization
has no specified duration, and either you or the organization may
terminate the employment relationship whenever either of us believes it
is desirable to do so, without consideration of cause or notice. The
at-will nature of our relationship may not be changed except by a
separate written agreement specifically entered into for such purpose
and signed by the board chair.

No statement or representation by a supervisor or manager or any other
employee, whether verbal or written, can supplement or modify this
handbook. Any delay or failure by ESIP to enforce any rule, regulation
or procedure contained in this handbook will not constitute a waiver of
ESIP's right to do so in the future.

This is to acknowledge that you have received and read your copy of the
handbook, are familiar with and understand its contents and agree to
comply with its terms during your employment.

(Please print)

Name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Date:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Title:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Signature:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\
**[LEAVE REQUEST FORM]{.underline}**

Earth Science Information Partners
----------------------------------

Date: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Employee name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Employee location:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Supervisor name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Dates Requested:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Reason for request:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Employee signature

Supervisor signature authorizing leave
