**Policy and Procedure 3.5 - Expense and Accounts Payable**
===========================================================

#### A.  Payroll

    a.  Policy: We pay staff members on the last day of the month. If
        the payday falls on a holiday, staff members will be paid on the
        last working day before the holiday.

    b.  Procedures:

        i.  The Operations Director processes payroll through Quickbooks.

#### B.  Time Sheet Preparation & Approval

    c.  Policy: All staff members must complete a timesheet for each pay
        period. All staff members should record actual hours worked plus
        all use of paid time off.

    d.  Procedures:

        i. Employees complete timesheets in Quickbooks and submit them to their
            supervisors on the due date, based on the schedule produced
            at the beginning of the year.

        ii. Supervisors review, correct if necessary, and approve.

        iii. All paid
            time off balances are maintained within the payroll system,
            based on the information provided on approved timesheets.

#### C.  Purchase & Procurement 

    a.  Policy: Any expenditure in excess of $10,000 for the purchase of
        a single item should have bids from three (3) suppliers if
        possible. These bids will be reviewed by the Executive Director
        and the bid award must be specifically approved in advance by
        the Executive Director.
        
        Due diligence must be followed for acquisitions of goods and
        services (resources), especially for procurement of resources
        that include costs for acquisition, operation, storage,
        maintenance, safeguards, or disposal. All acquisitions should be
        approved by the Executive Director. A request for an acquisition
        must be submitted at least 10 days before the resource must be
        ordered. A comparative analysis of available resources should be
        completed prior to procurement. The procurement of resources
        that cost more than $10,000 must follow a formal bidding process
        to ensure that the resource is acquired at a competitive price.

#### D.  Bill Approval & Processing 

    a.  Policy: Bills may be received by postal service or email. All bills are processed through Bill.com. All bills must be approved by the Executive
        Director. Approved bills will normally be paid within 30 days of
        receipt or as required by the agreement/bill terms. All accounts
        payable transactions must have supporting documentation adequate
        to demonstrate that costs claimed have been incurred, are
        allocable to the grant or other cost objective (personnel,
        indirect), and comply with applicable regulations.

    b.  Procedure:

        i.  Bills will be opened, reviewed and scanned to electronic
            form by the Operations Director.

        ii. All goods and services purchased directly for a grant are
            coded to the appropriate Job Name in the accounting system.

        iii. Bills are entered into Bill.com by the Operations Director upon receipt.

        iv. All invoices are stored in Bill.com.

#### E. Expense Reimbursement

    a.  Policy: Staff members are reimbursed for approved travel and
        entertainment expenses. Staff members are asked to complete a
        record of all expenses for which they seek reimbursement and to
        submit receipts along with the expense record for reimbursement
        to the Operations Director.  All reimbursements are processed through Bill.com.

#### F.  [Travel Expense - see policy](https://github.com/ESIPFed/Governance/blob/master/ESIP%20Policies%20and%20Procedures/3.0%20Business%20and%20Finance/ESIP%20P%26P%203.5A%20Travel%20and%20Expense%20Reimbursement%20Policy.md)

#### H.  Company Credit Cards

    a.  Policy: A credit card provides ESIP personnel with the ability
        to effectively and efficiently make purchases in relation to the
        Board of Directors approved ESIP budget.
         **Guidelines**
        1. The Executive Director will approve the issuance of all ESIP
        credit cards.
        2. Credit cards will be issued in the name of the employee.
        3. The card may be used only for the purchase of goods or
        services for official business of the ESIP.
        4. All purchases will be within current budget line item
        amounts. (See Fiscal Procedure for further details.)
        5. The person issued the card is responsible for its protection
        and custody, and shall immediately notify the credit card
        company and Executive Director if it is lost or stolen.
        6. The person issued the card must immediately surrender the
        card to the Executive Director when employment
        with ESIP has ended.
        7. The person using a credit card for purchases that cannot be
        substantiated as a necessary purchase for official business will
        be subject to disciplinary action

    b.  Procedure: Credit card statements, along with receipts for all
        items to be paid by the ESIP, will be reconciled on a monthly
        basis by the Operations Director and reviewed by the Executive
        Director. Receipts must show the date, purpose, and name(s) for
        which the expense was incurred. Monthly credit card statements
        will be reviewed by the Treasurer for
        accuracy. If receipt is lost or missing, employee will write a description of purchase, sign and date and Executive Director will also sign and date. This will be included with all other monthly receipts. 

#### I.  Expense Allocation

All cost items (labor, travel and other direct costs) which are incurred
specifically for the performance of a particular grant or similar cost
objective are direct charges provided that all like costs, incurred for
the same purpose and in similar circumstances, can also be readily and
economically identified as direct costs. Direct costs assigned to grants
include direct materials used, labor hours directly worked on the grant,
and equipment used exclusively for the grant, and goods or services
received from other entities that are directly used in completing the
grant. Cost items where (i) the allocability to specific cost objectives
is not readily measurable or (ii) are insignificant in value (example:
supplies) are charged to the applicable indirect expense pool.

Upon receipt of an executed grant or other agreement, the outside accountant creates a new customer/job in the accounting system. Service
items and classes may be created as needed to facilitate cost tracking
in accordance with grant requirements.

Direct expenses are all coded to the job via time entry, purchase
orders, expense reports, bill, and other means of documenting expenses.

Indirect rate allocations to government grants are calculated outside of
the accounting system by extracting cost data from the system and
entering it into an Excel rate model.

Indirect costs are costs of resources jointly or commonly used to
benefit two or more grants but not specifically identifiable with any
one grant. Typical examples of indirect costs include costs of general
administrative (G&A) services, technical support, depreciation,
insurance, security, operational and maintenance costs for buildings and
equipment, and utilities. As with direct costs, indirect costs can be
incurred internally or for goods and services received from other
entities.

All indirect costs are segregated into measurable pools of related
costs. They are accumulated by logical groupings or pools that are based
on the common relationships that they share with the business
objectives. These pools are distributed to the benefiting or generating
objectives by means of an allocation base common to all objectives which
will share in the allocation of the pooled expenses. The basic
classifications of indirect pools are fringe, indirect, and unallowable.

This Policy was approved by the Board of Directors of ESIP on October 17, 2017. Revisions to this policy were approved by the Board on September 15 2021.

